Captioning sponsored by
MacNEIL/LEHRER PRODUCTIONS
>> Brown: THE MOST DESTRUCTIVE
WILDFIRE IN COLORADO HISTORY HAS
DESTROYED MORE THAN 360 HOMES
AND FORCED NEARLY 40,000 PEOPLE
TO EVACUATE.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, WE
GET THE LATEST ON THE FIRE
OUTSIDE COLORADO SPRINGS WHICH
CONTINUES TO BURN OUT OF
CONTROL.
>> Brown: THEN, THE SUPREME
COURT RULES UNANIMOUSLY AN
ISOLATED HUMAN GENE MAY NOT BE
PATENTED.
WE EXAMINE WHAT THE DECISION
MEANS FOR THE FUTURE OF MEDICAL
RESEARCH.
Wo>>odruff: OUR SERIES ON FOOD
SECURITY GOES TO INDIA, WHERE
FARMERS ARE LOOKING TO THE PAST
FOR BETTER WAYS TO COPE WITH
CHANGES IN THE CLIMATE DOWN THE
ROAD.
>> Brown: RAY SUAREZ GAUGES
ATTITUDES IN THE U.S. TOWARD
GAYS AND LESBIANS ON THE HEELS
OF A NEW POLL POINTING TO
INCREASING ACCEPTANCE.
>> Woodruff: SPENCER MICHELS
REPORTS ON HOW CALIFORNIA IS
PREPARING FOR A MAJOR DECISION
ON SAME-SEX MARRIAGE.
>> Brown: AND WE CLOSE WITH A
CONVERSATION WITH AUTHOR WALTER
MOSLEY ABOUT HIS FAMOUS
FICTIONAL DETECTIVE, "EASY
RAWLINS", AND MORE.
THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON TONIGHT'S
NEWSHOUR.
>> WE BEGIN WITH A LATE
DEVELOPMENT ABOUT THE WAR IN
SYRIA.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION HAS
DETERMINED THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
HAS USED CHEMICAL WEAPON BOSTON
POLICE THAT WORD CAME LATE THIS
AFTERNOON FROM DEPUTY NATIONAL
SECURITY ADVISER BEN ROADS.
THE STATEMENT SAID THE U.S.
FOUND NO EVIDENCE THAT REBELS
HAVE USED CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS SAY IN
RESPONSE TO THE FINDINGS
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS DECIDED TO
PROVIDE NEW MILITARY SUPPORT TO
THE REBELS BUT THEY GAVE NO
DETAILS.
THE CONFIRMED DEATH TOLL IN THE
SYRIAN CIVIL WAR HAS GROWN TO
NEARLY 93,000.
THE U.N. HUMAN RIGHTS OFFICE
REPORTED THE NEW FIGURE TODAY.
IT SAID ON AVERAGE NEARLY 5,000
PEOPLE ARE BEING KILLED EVERY
MONTH AND U.N. HUMAN RIGHT CHIEF
SAID THE ACTUAL DEATH TOLL MAY
BE MUCH HIGHER.
>> CIVILIANS ARE BEARING THE
BRUNT OF WIDESPREAD VIOLENT AND
OFTEN INDISCRIMINATE ATTACKS,
WHICH ARE DEVASTATING WHOLE
SWATHS OF MAJOR TOWNS AND CITIES
AS WELL AS OUTLYING VILLAGES.
>> THE WAR HAS ALSO DRIVEN MORE
THAN 1 MILLION SYRIANS TO TAKE
REFUGE IN OTHER COUNTRIES AND
MILLIONS MORE ARE INTERNALLY
DISPLACED.
>> Brown: AND THE OTHER MAJOR
STORY TODAY, FOR THE SECOND YEAR
IN A ROW, COLORADO IS UNDER
ASSAULT BY AN OUT-OF-SCROLL
WILDFIRE.
TODAY, THERE WAS WORD OF
WIDESPREAD LOSSES AND WARNINGS
OF PERHAPS EVEN WORSE TO COME.
>> WE HAVE, RIGHT NOW, 360 HOMES
THAT ARE COMPLETE LOSSES.
>> Brown: THE NEWS CAME FROM
SHERIFF TERRY MAKETA IN EL PASO
COUNTY, COLORADO.
THE COUNT OF HOMES BURNED NEARLY
QUADRUPLED IN 24 HOURS, AND IT
COULD GO HIGHER STILL.
>> WE HAVE 79 ADDRESSES WE COULD
NOT VERIFY FOR NUMEROUS REASONS,
EITHER ACCESSIBILITY, DOWNED
TREES OR THE FIRE ACTIVITY
DISRUPTED THE ASSESSMENT AND WE
WERE UNABLE TO SEND CARS IN.
>> Brown: THE FIRE SPRANG TO
LIFE TUESDAY AND SPREAD ACROSS
94,000 ACRES, FUELED BY HIGH
WINDS AND HOT, DRY CONDITIONS.
SOME HOMES SURVIVED INITIALLY,
ONLY TO BE CONSUMED WHEN
SHIFTING WINDS BLEW FLAMES BACK
ON THEM.
TODAY, THE FIRE WAS BURNING OUT
OF CONTROL IN THE BLACK FOREST,
A HEAVILY WOODED AREA NORTHEAST
OF COLORADO SPRINGS.
IT'S NOT FAR FROM THE SITE OF
2012'S WALDO CANYON FIRE.
THAT BLAZE-- ONE YEAR AGO THIS
MONTH-- ENGULFED 347 HOMES,
KILLED TWO PEOPLE AND LED TO
MORE THAN $350 MILLION IN
INSURANCE CLAIMS.
SO FAR, THERE'VE BEEN NO DEATHS
OR INJURIES IN THE BLACK FOREST
FIRE, BUT MORE THAN
38,000 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN FORCED
FROM THEIR HOMES.
>> I'M NOT SURE IF MY HOUSE IS
LOST.
I JUST DON'T KNOW.
>> WE TOOK OUR PHOTOGRAPHS,
THINGS THAT WE CAN'T REPLA WECE
BROUGHT WITH US, OTHER THAN THAT
WE'RE SAYING FIRE INSURANCE.
THERE'S A REASON FOR IT.
>> IT'S TERRIBLE.
WE HAVE OUR MOTOR HOME HERE SO
WE'RE GOING TO BE LEAVING HERE
PRETTY QUICK, BUT WE DON'T LIKE
IT.
OUR OTHER NEIGHBORS ARE HERE
TOO.
>> Brown: AS THE FIRE SPREAD
TODAY, MANDATORY EVACUATIONS
SPREAD TO COLORADO SPRINGS,
AFFECTING SOME 1,000 HOMES.
FIREFIGHTERS AND AUTHORITIES,
INCLUDING THE NATIONAL GUARD,
SAY THEY'RE THROWING EVERYTHING
THEY CAN AT THE INFERNO,
INCLUDING TWO C-130 CARGO PLANES
OUTFITTED TO DROP SLURRY
RETARDANT FROM ABOVE.
>> I ALMOST WANT TO SAY HERE WE
ARE AGAIN.
WE LEARNED A LOT LAST YEAR FROM
WALDO.
>> Brown: BUT HUNDREDS OF HOMES
ARE STILL IN JEOPARDY, AND
SHERIFF MAKETA SAYS THEIR FATE
DEPENDS LARGELY ON HOW THE WIND
BLOWS.
>> WE ARE WATCHING THE WEATHER
CONDITIONS VERY CLOSELY AND WIND
IS PROBABLY OUR NUMBER ONE
THREAT.
IT IS WHAT HAS BEEN THE
GAMECHANGER, IT IS WHAT HAS
CHANGED THE CONDITIONS.
>> Brown: COLORADO GOVERNOR JOHN
HICKENLOOPER HAS DECLARED
EMERGENCIES FOR THE BLACK FOREST
BLAZE AND ANOTHER FIRE,
SIXTY MILES TO THE SOUTHWEST, AT
THE ROYAL GORGE BRIDGE AND PARK.
THAT ONE HAS BURNED 20
STRUCTURES.
STILL ANOTHER FIRE, SPARKED BY
LIGHTNING MONDAY, IS BURNING IN
THE STATE'S ROCKY MOUNTAIN
NATIONAL PARK.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE "NEWSHOUR": THE SUPREME
COURT ON WHO CAN PATENT A HUMAN
GENE; INDIA'S FARMERS TURN TO
OLER DSEEDS TO PROTECT THE
FUTURE OF RICE; AMERICA'S
CHANGING ATTITUDES TOWARD
HOMOSEXUALITY; CALIFORNIA
PREPARES FOR A BIG DECISION ON
GAY MARRIAGE AND A NEW NOVEL BY
ACCLAIMED AUTHOR WALTER MOSLEY.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
ONE PERSON DIED AND AT LEAST 73
PEOPLE WERE INJURED IN LOUISIANA
TODAY, WHEN A CHEMICAL PLANT
EXPLODED AND CAUGHT RE.FI
AMATEUR VIDEO SHOWED A THICK
PLUME OF SMOKE RISING FROM THE
FACILITY, 20 MILES SOUTHEAST OF
BATON ROUGE.
THE PLANT PRODUCES HIGHLY
FLAMMABLE GASES, ETHYLENE AND
PROPYLENE.
THERE WAS NO IMMEDIATE WORD ON
WHAT SPARKED THE EXPLOSION.
REVELATIONS OF EXTENSIVE
SURVEILLANCE BY THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY ARE ALREADY
DOING DAMAGE.
THE DIRECTOR OF THE FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION MADE
THAT CLAIM TODAY, BACKED UP BY
SOME IN CONGRESS.
IT WAS THE LATEST IN THE UPROAR
OVER THE N.S.A.'S DATA
COLLECTION ON PHONE CALLS AND
ONLINE COMMUNICATIONS.
F.B.I. HEAD ROBERT MUELLER TOLD
A HOUSE HEARING THE LEAKS HAVE
DONE SIGNIFICANT HARM TO
NATIONAL SECURITY, BY PUTTING
TERROR SUSPECTS ON ALERT.
>> BUT I CAN TELL YOU EVERY TIME
WE HAVE A LEAK LIKE THIS, AND
YOU FOLLOW IT UP AND YOU LOOK AT
FOLLOW THIS VERY, VERY, VERY,
VERY CLOSELY, AND THEY'RE
LOOKING FOR WAYS AROUND IT.
ONE OF THE GREAT VULNERABILITIES
THE TERRORISTS UNDERSTAND IS
THEIR COMMUNICATIONS.
AND THEY ARE CONSISTENTLY
LOOKING FOR WAYS TO HAVE
COMMUNICATIONS.
AND ANY TIDBIT OF INFORMATION
COMES OUT IN TERMS OF OUR
CAPABILITIES AND OUR PROGRAMS
AND THE LIKE, THEY ARE
IMMEDIATELY FINDING WAYS AROUND
IT.
>> Holman: AT THE SAME TIME,
MUELLER TRIED TO CALM PRIVACY
CONCERNS, SAYING THE COLLECTED
TELEPHONE DATA CAN BE USED ONLY
WITHIN STRICT LIMITS.
>> THE PROGRAM IS SET UP FOR A
VERY LIMITED PURPOSE AND A
LIMITED OBJECTIVE AND THAT IS TO
IDENTIFY INDIVIDUALS IN THE
UNITED STATES A USING TELEPHONE
FOR TERRORIST ACTIVITIES AND TO
DRAW THAT NETWORK.
>> Holman: LAWMARS AKELSO
RECEIVED MORE CLOSED-DOOR
BRIEFINGS.
AFTER ONE, THE N.S.A.'S
DIRECTOR, ARMY GENERAL KEITH
ALEXANDER, EMERGED TO SAY HE
WANTS MORE DETAILS MADE PUBLIC.
>> IT'S IMPORTANT THAT YOU HAVE
THAT INFORMATION BUT WE DON'T
WANT TO RISK IS AMERICAN LIVES
IN DOING THAT.
SO WHAT WE'RE BEING IS
DELIBERATE IN THIS PROCESS SO
THAT WE DON'T CAUSE A TERRORIST
ATTACK BY GIVING UP TOO MUCH
INFORMATION.
>> Holman: MEANWHILE, THERE WERE
NEW CALLS TO FIND AND PUNISH
EDWARD SNOWDEN, THE INTELLIGENCE
CONTRACTOR BEHIND THE LEAKS.
MARYLAND CONGRESSMAN DUTCH
RUPPERSBERGER, THE RANKING
DEMOCRAT ON THE HOUSE
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE,
SUGGESTED SNOWDEN HAD ULTERIOR
MOTIVES FOR FLEEING TO HONG
KONG.
>> SOME SAYING HE'S A HERO.
HE'S BROKEN THE LAW.
WE HAVE LAW FOR WHISTLE BLOWERS
AND PEOPLE WHO THINK THERE'S AN
INJUSTICE BEING DONE, ALL HE HAD
TO DO WAS RAISE HIS HAND.
GO TO THE AUTHORITIES, UNDER
WHISTELBLOWERS LAW, HE IS
PROTECTED YET HE CHOSE TO GO TO
CHINA, A COUNTRY THAT IS
CYBERATTACKING US EVERYDAY AND
TAKING BILLIONS OF DOLLARS OF
AMERICAN BUSINESS DATA.
>> Holman: SNOWDEN NOW IS THE
SUBJECT OF A JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
INVESTIGATION.
LATER, SENATOR DIANNE FEINSTEIN,
CHAIRING THE SENATE INTELLIGENCE
COMMITTEE, SAID THE N.S.A. NOW
PLANS TO RELEASE ON MONDAY, A
LIST OF ATTACKS PREVENTED BY THE
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMS.
THE SENATE TODAY TK ITOOS FIRST
MAJOR VOTE ON AMENDMENTS TO THE
IMMIGRATION BILL.
A REPUBLICAN PROPOSAL WOULD HAVE
MANDATED THE SOUTHERN BORDER BE
FULLY SECURE FOR SIX MONTHS
BEFORE IMMIGRATION REFORM
MEASURES KICK IN.
IT WAS VOTED DOWN 57 TO 43.
THERE'S FRESH EVIDENCE THAT
WHITES ARE LOSING MAJORITY-
STATUS IN THE U.S.
THE CENSUS BUREAU REPORTED TODAY
THAT AS OF 2012, RACIAL AND
ETHNIC MINORITIES ACCOUNTED FOR
HALF THE POPULATION UNDER THE
AGE OF FIVE.
THE REPORT SAID WITHIN FIVE
YEARS, MINORITIES WILL MAKE UP
MORE THAN HALF THE POPULATION
UNDER 18.
THE TREND IS BEING FUELED PARTLY
BY IMMIGRATION AND HIGHER BIRTH
RATES AMONG MINORITIES.
A FORMER PRESIDENT OF IRAN URGED
IN TURKEY, PRIME MINISTER RECEP
TAYYIP ERDOGAN ISSUED AN
ULTIMATUM TO PROTESTERS.
HE DEMANDED THOUSANDS OF
DEMONSTRATORS END THEIR
OCCUPATION OF A PARK IN CENTRAL
ISTANBUL.
THE SIT-IN WAS TRIGGERED BY THE
GOVERNMENT'S PLANS TO BULLDOZE
THE SITE.
ERDOGAN ADDRESSED LEADERS OF HIS
RULING POLITICAL PARTY IN
ANKARA.
>> (translated): NOBODY CAN
INVADE THE PARK.
THEREFORE WE HAVE BEEN PATIENT
TILL NOW BUT NOW PATIENCE IS
RUNNING OUT.
THIS IS MY FINAL WARNING.
I AM CALLING ON MOTHERS AND
FATHERS, PLEASE DO SOMETHING
ABOUT YOUR CHILDREN.
>> Holman: FIVE PEOPLE HAVE DIED
IN TWO WEEKS OF CLASHES WITH
POLICE, AND MORE THAN 5,600 HAVE
BEEN INJURED.
A FORMER PRESIDENT OF IRAN URGED
VOTERS TODAY NOT TO BOYCOTT
TOMORROW'S PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION.
AKBAR HASHEMI RAFSANJANI HAS
BEEN BARRED FROM RUNNING BY
CONSERVATIVE HARD-LINERS.
BUT HE SAID REFORM-MINDED VOTERS
STILL SHOULD GO TO THE POLLS.
MEANWHILE, THERE APPEARED TO BE
A LATE SURGE OF SUPPORT FOR
HASSAN ROHANI, A RELATIVELY
MODERATE CLERIC.
THERE WERE WIDESPREAD CLAIMS OF
FRAUD IN THE 2009 ELECTION, BUT
THE REGIME CRACKED DOWN ON
PROTESTS.
THE U.S. ECONOMY SENT ANOTHER
POSITIVE SIGNAL ON HIRING TODAY.
FIRST-TIME CLAIMS FOR
UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS HIT A
FIVE-YEAR LOW IN A SIGNAL THE
LABOR MARKET IS IMPROVING.
THE NEWS HELPED WALL STREET
BREAK A THREE-DAY LOSING STREAK.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED MORE THAN 180 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 15,176.
THE NASDAQ ROSE NEARLY 45 POINTS
TO CLOSE AT 3,445.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Brown: NEXT, WE RESUME OUR
WEEK-LONG LOOK AT FOOD SECURITY
AND HOW CLIMATE CHANGE IS
AFFECTING WHAT WE PRODUCE AND
HOW WE EAT.
TONIGHT, SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
SAM EATON REPORTS FROM INDIA ON
HOW FARMERS ARE TURNING TO
ANCIENT SEEDS TO KEEP THEIR
CROPS VIABLE IN THE FUTURE.
IT'S PA OF RTOUR SERIES: "FOOD
FOR 9 BILLION" IN PARTNERSHIP
WITH PUBLIC RADIO
INTERNATIONAL'S "THE WORLD,"
HOMELANDS PRODUCTIONS, AMERICAN
PUBLIC MEDIA'S "MARKETPLACE" AND
THE CENTER FOR INVESTIGATIVE
REPTINORG.
>> Reporter: ON MAY 25, 2009
CYCLONE AILA SLAMMED INTO THE
GANGES RIVER DELTA ON THE COAST
OF BANGLADESH AND INDIA.
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS FLED AS
THE STORM SURGE TORE THROUGH
EARTHEN EMBANKMENTS AND FLOODED
RICE FIELDS WITH A WALL OF SEA
WATER.
I TRAVELED TO EASTERN INDIA WITH
ECOLOGIST ASISH GHOSH TO SEE HOW
THE MORE THAN FOUR MILLION
PEOPLE LIVING IN THIS VAST RIVER
DELTA ARE ADAPTING TO THE SALTY
SOILS THE STORM LEFT BEHIND.
IT'S BEEN FOUR YEARS SINCE THE
CYCLONE HIT.
AND FARMER RAJ KRISHNA DAS SAYS
GROWING ENOUGH FOOD IS STILL A
STRUGGLE.
>> SO HE EVEN CANNOT HAVE ANY
VEGETABLE GROWING AFTER AILA
BECAUSE STILL THERE IS SALT IN
THE SOIL.
>> Reporter: THIS IS WHAT
CLIMATE CHANGE LOOKS LIKE FOR
THE DENSELY POPULATED RIVER
DELTAS OF THE WORLD.
THEY HOLD SOME OF THE MOST
PRODUCTIVE FARMLAND ON THE
PLANET.
BUT IT'S ALSO SOME OF THE MOST
THREANED.TE
>> WE HAVE LOST THIS AMOUNT OF
LAND ON ALL SIDES OF THE ISLAND.
>> Reporter: TODAY THIS DELTA
COASTLINE IS RETREATING MORE
THAN 600 FEET A YEAR AND THE
SALT IS ENCROACHING EVEN FARTHER
INLAND.
AS FARMERS HERE ADAPT TO RISING
SEA LEVELS AND MORE POWERFUL
STORMS, THEY BECOME A CASE STUDY
FOR HOW TO PRODUCE FOOD ON A
WARMING PLANET.
BUT THEIR SOLUTION MAY COME AS A
SURPRISE.
THE ONLY THING THAT WILL GROW IN
DASS FIELD TODAY IS A SALT
TOLERANT RICE VARIETY DEVELOPED
MORE THAN A CENTURY AGO BY
SMALL-SCALE FARMERS JUST LIKE
HIM.
>> HE THINKS IT IS ONE OF THE
BIGGEST RESOURCES HE HAS GOT.
IT IS MORE PRECIOUS THAN GOLD TO
HIM.
>> Reporter: GHOSH'S CENTER FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENT AND
OTHER NONPROFITS ARE TRYING TO
REINTRODUCE THESE TRADITIONAL
SEEDS, WHICH BECAME RARE AFTER
FARMERS BEGAN ADOPTING MODERN,
HIGH-YIELDING VARIETIES IN THE
1960S.
SO-CALLED GREEN REVOLUTION
VARIETIES THAT COULD DOUBLE, OR
EVEN TRIPLE THEIR RICE HARVEST
GIVEN THE RIGHT CONDITIONS AND
CHEMICAL INPUTS.
BUT THESE SAME SEEDS WERE THE
FIRST TO FAIL AFTER CYCLONE AILA
DOUSED THE SOIL WITH SALT WATER.
>> AILA CHANGED EVERYTHING.
HE LOST HIS HOME, HE LOST HIS
POSSESSION.
>> Reporter: STARTING OVER WITH
ONLY A HANDFUL OF THE OLD, SALT
TOLERANT SEEDS, FARMERS LIKE DAS
HAVE LABORED FOR THREE YEARS TO
GROW ENOUGH RICE TO WARD OFF
HUNGER.
>> NOW HE'S CONFIDENT HE'S GOT
ENOUGH SEEDS TO COVER HIS LAND.
SO I THINK THE STORY BETWEEN THE
LAST THREE YEARS HAS CHANGED
FROM A STORY OF DESPAIR TO A
STORY OF HOPE IN FUTURE.
>> Reporter: BUT THE STRUGGLE TO
SURVIVE AFTER THE CYCLONE ALSO
OFFERS A STARK WARNING ABOUT WHO
MUCH THIS GENETIC LEGACY IN
AGRICULTURE HAS BEEN LOST.
SCIENTIST DEBAL DEB HAS SPENT
MORE THAN DECADE TRAVELING
ACROSS INDIA TRYING TO SAVE
WHAT'S LEFT OF THESE TRADITIONAL
SEEDS.
>> THIS IS STERILE LEMA.
>> Reporter: FARMERS IN INDIA
ONCE CULTIVATED MORE THAN A
HUNDRED THOUSAND DISTINCT
VARIETIES OF RICE ALONE.
MOST OF THOSE ARE NOW LOST
FOREVER.
BUT HERE ON THIS SMALL NONPROFIT
SEED FARM IN EASTERN INDIA, DEB
IS PROPAGATING NEARLY A THOUSAND
OF THEM AND DISTRIBUTING THE
SEEDS FREE OF CHARGE, INCLUDING
THE SALT TOLERANT VARIETY
FARMERS ARE NOW GROWING IN THE
GANGES RIVER DELTA.
DEB SAYS MANY OF THESE SEEDS ARE
IDEALLY SUITED TO THE EXTREME
AND UNPREDICTABLE CONDITIONS OF
THE FUTURE.
>> MY OWN COLLECTION I HAVE MORE
THAN 200 VARIETIES, SOME OF
WHICH CAN WITHSTAND DROUGHT AND
CAN YIELD SOMETHING ON ZERO
IRRIGATION.
SOME VARIETIES WHICH CAN
WITHSTAND 12 FEET DEEP WATER FOR
THREE MONTHS AND THE STEM WILL
ELONGATE AND STILL GIVE SOME
YIELD.
AND WE HAVE AT LEAST SIX
VARIETIES OF SALT TOLERANT RICE
WHICH CAN WITHSTAND SEA WATER
INTRUSION.
THESE ARE THE UNIQUE PROPERTIES
WHICH GENETIC ENGINEERS HAVE NOT
YET IMAGINED.
>> Reporter: DESPITE THE
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SPENT BY
GOVERNMENTS AND AGRIBUSINESS ON
PLANT BREEDING PROGRAMS AND
GENETIC ENGINEERING, DEB SAYS
THESE PROGRAMS HAVE YET TO
CREATE NEW SEEDS THAT CAN RIVAL
THE TRADITIONAL VARIETIES
TOLERANCE FOR EXTREME
CONDITIONS.
AND AS GLOBAL TEMPERATURES
CONTINUE TO RISE, EVEN THE MOST
ARDENT DEFENDERS OF THE GREEN
REVOLUTION ARE NOW REALIZING HOW
ESSENTIAL THESE TRADITIONAL
VARIETIES ARE FOR THE FUTURE OF
AGRICULTURE.
>> Reporter: THAT GREEN
REVOLUTION BEGAN THOUSANDS OF
MILES AWAY, IN THE PHILIPPINES,
AT THE INTERNATIONAL RICE
RESEARCH INSTITUTE.
NOW SCIENTISTS HERE ARE TRYING
TO BREED NEW SEEDS THAT WILL
WITHSTAND THE STRESSES OF
CLIMATE CHANGE.
THE INSTITUTE HAS STORED TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF THE WORLDS
TRADITIONAL RICE VARIETIES IN
ITS FROZEN SEED VAULTS AS A
GENETIC PALLETTE FOR FUTURE
SEEDS.
BUT MANY OF THESE SEEDS WERE
COLLECTED IN THE 1960s.
AND AFTER BEING STORED FOR SO
LONG THEY MAY NO LONGER BE
VIABLE FOR BREEDING.
THAT MEANS DEBAL DEB'S
GRASSROOTS SEED FARM BACK IN
INDIA MAY BE ONE OF THE MOST
VALUABLE GENETIC RESOURCES LEFT.
STILL, SCIENTISTS SAY SIMPLY
REINTRODUCING OLD VARIETIES
ISN'T GOING TO FEED THE WORLD;
THEY JUST DON'T PRODUCE ENOUGH.
THEY'RE WORKING TO BUILD NEW
VARIETIES USING THE GENETIC
INFORMATION EMBEDDED IN THE
TRADITIONAL SEEDS.
M.S. SWAMINATHAN IS CONSIDERED
THE FATHER OF INDIA'S GREEN
REVOLUTION.
>> THERE IS NO OTHER ALTERNATIVE
IN THIS COUNTRY.
LAND IS GOING OUT OF
AGRICULTURE.
IN FACT, THE FARMS WHERE I HAD
DEMONSTRATION 40 YEARS AGO THEY
ALL DISAPPEARED.
THEY HAVE BECOME BIG MALLS.
THEY HAVE BECOME BIG SHOPS AND
SO ON AND HOTELS.
SO LAND IS A SHRINKING RESOURCE.
WE HAVE TO PRODUCE MORE AND MORE
FROM LESS AND LESS LAND, LESS
AND LESS WATER.
THAT MEANS WE NEED THE GREEN
REVOLUTION APPROACH,
PRODUCTIVITY IMPROVEMENT
APPROACH.
THE INTERNATIONAL RICE RESEARCH
INSTITUTE HAS SUCCESSFULLY BRED
SOME CLIMATE RESILIENT TRAITS
FROM THE TRADITIONAL VARIETIES
INTO A SINGLE HIGH YIELDING
SEED.
THE NEW PLANTS ARE DESIGNED TO
TOLERATE LIMITED AMOUNTS OF
DROUGHT AND FLOODING DURING THE
SAME GROWING SEASON.
SO FAR THE INSTITUTE HAS
DISTRIBUTED THEM TO MORE THAN
FOUR MILLION FARMERS.
IN EVEN THE REMOTEST PARTS OF
INDIA THE GREEN REVOLUTION
CAUSED MANY FARMERS TO ABANDON
THEIR TRADITIONAL SEEDS FOR THE
MODERN, HIGH YIELDING VARIETIES
PROMOTED BY THE GOVERNMENT.
BUT FOR THOSE WHO DIDN'T THE
BENEFITS OF THESE LOCALLY
ADAPTED SEEDS ARE BECOMING MORE
AND MORE PRONOUNCED.
64-YEAR-OLD FARMER LOKNATH
NAURI, GROWS 30 DIFFERENT
TRADITIONAL VARIETIES OF RICE,
MILLET, CORN, SQUASH AND LENTILS
ON HIS TWO ACRE PLOT IN EASTERN
INDIA.
HIS SONG IS A CELEBRATION OF THE
DIVERSITY OF TRADITIONAL SEEDS
AND THE HAPPINESS IT BRINGS TO
HIS FAMILY AND HIS LAND.
THESE SEEDS, CREATED OVER
THOUSANDS OF YEARS, DON'T JUST
HAVE THE GENES TO WITHSTAND
DROUGHTS AND FLOODS.
THEY'RE ALSO ADAPTED TO LOCAL
SOILS AND PESTS, ELIMINATING THE
NEED FOR COSTLY NITROGEN
FERTILIZERS AND PESTICIDES.
SOME ARE SO RESILIENT THEY
SPROUT EVEN IN THE DRY MONTHS.
>> (translated): LOOK AT THIS
PEARL MILLET.
WE CUT IT LAST DECEMBER.
THERE HASN'T BEEN ANY RAIN FOR
FIVE MONTHS.
AND IT'S SENDING UP NEW SHOOTS.
THIS WOULD NEVER HAPPEN WITH A
HIGH YIELDING VARIETY.
ONCE THE RAINS COME WE DON'T
EVEN HAVE TO RESEED IT.
IT JUST GROWS BACK BY ITSELF FOR
TWO TO THREE YEARS.
>> Reporter: NAURI SAYS HE TRIED
THE NEW RICE SEEDS BUT HIS
HARVEST DIDN'T EVEN COME CLOSE
TO THE TRADITIONAL VARIETIES.
>> (translated): I TRIED
PLANTING THAT HIGH YIELDING RICE
ONE YEAR.
BUT I DIDN'T HAVE MONEY TO PAY
FOR THE CHEMICAL FERTILIZERS.
AND WITHOUT THEM, IT WOULDN'T
GROW.
SO I WENT BACK TO THE
TRADITIONAL VARIETIES.
>> Reporter: THE SEARCH
CONTINUES FOR WAYS TO FEED NINE
BILLION PEOPLE ON A CLIMATE-
CHANGED PLANET.
THE NEW SUPER SEEDS SCIENTISTS
ARE DEVELOPING COULD TRANSFORM
AGRICULTURE IN THE YEARS TO
COME.
BUT FOR NOW MANY OF THE WORLD'S
POOREST FARMERS ARE TURNING TO
THE SEEDS THAT SUSTAINED THEIR
ANCESTORS AS A SORT OF GENETIC
INSURANCE POLICY AGAINST AN
UNPREDICTABLE FUTURE.
>> Woodruff: WE TURN TO THE
SUPREME COURT'S DECISION ON
GENES AND ITS IMPACT FOR
PATIENTS AND MEDICAL RESEARCH.
THE JUSTICES UNANIMOUSLY RULED
TODAY THAT A COMPANY CANNOT
PATENT AN ISOLATED HUMAN GENE.
THE CASE INVOLVED MYRIAD
GENETICS, A COMPANY THAT HOLDS
PATENTS ON GENES CORRELATED WITH
HEREDITARY BREAST AND OVARIAN
CANCER, KNOWN AS B.R.C.A.-1 AND
B.R.C.A.-2.
MYRIAD SELLS THE GENETIC TESTS
FOR THOSE CANCERS.
IN THE MAJORITY OPINION, JUSTICE
CLARENCE THOMAS WROTE:
"MYRIAD FOUND THE LOCATION OF
THE B.R.C.A.-1 AND B.R.C.A.-2
GENES. BUT THAT DISCOVERY, BY
ITSELF, DOES NOT RENDER THE
B.R.C.A. GENES PATENT ELIGIBLE."
BUT THE JUSTICES ALSO FOUND THAT
FIRMS CAN PATENT SYNTHETICALLY
CREATED GENETIC MATERIAL KNOWN
AS C-D.N.A.
FOR A LOOK AT THE IMPLICATIONS,
WE ARE JOINED BY TODD DICKINSON.
HE'S THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
THE AMERICAN INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY LAW ASSOCIATION.
AND SANDRA PARK, AN ATTORNEY
WITH THE WOMEN'S RIGHTS PROJECT
AT THE A.C.L.U.
THEIR TEAM ARGUED THE CASE
AGAINST MYRIAD GENETICS.
S WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
AND, SANDRA PARK, I WANT TO
START WITH YOU.
IT WAS YOUR SIDE THAT WAS
ARGUING AGAINST MYRIAD BEING
ABLE TO HAVE CONTROL OR KEEP
THIS PATENT.
HOW DO YOU READ THE JUSTICES'
RULING?
>> WELL, WE WERE VERY PLEASED
WITH THE RULING.
OUR FUNDAMENTAL ARGUMENT ALL
ALONG HAS BEEN HUMAN GENES
CANNOT BE PATENTED, AND THE
PROBLEM WITH THESE PATENT IS
THEY GAVE MYRIAD THE EXCLUSIVE
RIGHT TO CONTROL WHAT TESTING
WAS DONE ON THESE GENES AND EVEN
WHAT RESEARCH COULD BE DONE ON
THESE GENES.
SO THE COURT'S RULING TODAY
LIFTED THAT BARRIER TO
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH, TO MEDICAL
INNOVATIONS, AND THAT WAS WHAT
OUR PLAINTIFFS, WHO ARE
GENETICISTS, PATHOLOGISTS, AS
WELL AS PATIENTS WHO NEED BETTER
ACCESS TO THIS TYPE OF TESTING,
THAT WAS OUR GOAL AND THAT IS
WHAT WE GOT FROM THE SUPREME
COURT TODAY.
>> Woodruff: TODD DICKINSON,
YOUR ORGANIZATION FILED A BRIEF
SUPPORTING THE COMPANY MYRIAD.
HOW DO YOU READ THE RESULTS?
>> OUR BRIEF DIDN'T SUPPORT
EITHER SIDE IN THIS.
WE WERE TRYING, TO AS WE OFTEN
DO, TRYING TO GET THE LAW RIGHT
BASED ON THE HISTORY-- AND THE
PUBLIC POLICY IN THIS AREA.
I THINK WHAT JUSTICE THOMAS IS
SAYING IS BASICALLY THAT
NATURALLY OCCURRING DISCOVERIES
AND HIS FRAMING OF IT ARE NOT
PATENTABLE AND MANMADE
INVENTIONS ARE.
HE DREW A LINE IN THIS
PARTICULAR CASE THAT HIGHLIGHTS
THAHIGHLIGHTSTHAT.
>> Woodruff: WHAT WHAT DO YOU
THINK THAT WILL MEAN FOR MYRIAD
GENETICS AND WHAT IT'S BEEN ABLE
TO DO?
>> WELL, SHORT TERM IT PROBABLY
WON'T HAVE MUCH OF AN IMPACT.
THESE PATENTS EXPIRE THE YEAR
AFTER NEXT WHICH IS KIND OF AN
INTERESTING THING BUT THERE ARE
OTHER PATENTS MYRIAD HOLDS ON
ONcDNA, THE METHODS TO DO THE
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING.
I WOULD GUESS FOR THE TIME BEING
THE MYRIAD IS STILL THE BEST
TEST YOU CAN GET AND MOST PEOPLE
WILL STILL WANT TO GO THERE.
INSURANCE COVERS THEIR TEST FOR
EXAMPLE IN MANY, MANY CASES.
>> Woodruff: YOU'RE SAYING IT
WON'T HAVE MUCH OF AN IMPACT.
SANDRA PARK, YOU'RE SAYING THIS
IS GOOD NEWS FOR PATIENTS,
GENETICISTS.
HOW AM I HEARING THIS
DIFFERENTLY?
>> WL, IEL THINK THE PROBLEM HAS
BEEN THAT MYRIAD HAS USED THEIR
PATENTS TO HAVE A MONOPOLY ON
GENETIC TESTING, AND THAT HAS
STOPPED OTHER LABORATORIES, EVEN
THOSE WHO WANT TO OFFER TESTING
USING OTHER METHODS, OR EVEN
INCLUDING THE BRCA GENES WITH
OTHER GREENS CONNECTED TO BREAST
AND OVARIAN CANCER RISKS TO
PROVIDE A MORE COMPREHENSIVE
PICTURE OF A PATIENT'S RISK.
AND THE RULING TODAY APLOWS FOR
ALL OF THAT.
IT ALLOWS FOR THAT COMPETITION.
AND I THINK WE'VE ALREADY HEARD,
AT LEAST TWO OR THREE
LABORATORIES, ANNOUNCING THAT
THEY PLAN TO OFFER GENETIC
TESTING THAT INCLUDES THE BRCA
GENES WITHIN THIS YEAR.
>> Woodruff: IF THAT'S THE
CASE, TODD DICKINSON, WHY ISN'T
IT A SETBACK FOR THE COMPANY?
JUST TO COME BACK TO YOUR
ARGUMENT, AND WHAT SHE JUST
SAID, THAT IT MEANS THAT MYRIAD
NOW HAS COMPETITION, THAT OTHER
COMPANIES WILL BE ABLE TO DO
THIS.
>> THAT'S RIGHT, AND I THINK WE
HAVE TO EXPWAIT SEE HOW THE
COMPETITION PLAYS OUT, WHETHER
OTHERS ARE ABLE TO OFFER A
COMPARABLE TEST.
MYRIAD HAS MEMBERSHIP, MANY
YEARS OF DATA, FOR EXAMPLE, TO
HELP NORMALIZE TEST.
I THINK THE BIGGER QI QUESTION
FRANKLY, THE LONG-TERM
IMPLICATIONS AND WHETHER OR NOT
THE OPINION PUTS AT RISK
THOUSANDS OF OTHER PATENTS
THROUGHOUT AND ALL OTHER
CONTEXTS IN BIOTECHNOLOGY.
WE HAVE PLENTY OF INDUSTRY TO
WHICH THESE PATENTS COULD BE KEY
IN TERMS OF ENCOURAGING
INNOVATION, ENCOURAGING
INVESTMENT IN THE INNOVATION TO
BRING THEM TO MARKET, FROM
BIOFUEL TO ENZYMES FOR CLEAN
WATER, EXTRACTIVE TECHNOLOGIES
FOR FINDING NEW ANTIBIOTICS.
IT RAISEAISE LOT OF QUESTIONS.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ARE YOU
SAYING IT MEANS FOR THEM?
>> I THINK THE QUESTION IS WILL
THIS OPINION BE EXPANDED TO
COVER ALL THOSE OTHER PATENTS,
WHICH MAY BE AT RISK AT THIS
POINT.
WE'VE ISSUED PATENTS FOR 30
YEARS IN THIS AREA.
THERE ARE THOUSANDS AND
THOUSANDS OUT THERE AND IT
CREATES SOME UNCERTAINTY.
>> Woodruff: BEFORE WE BROADEN
IT TOOK, SANDRA PARK, I WANT TO
COME BACK TO YOU.
WE TALKED WITH A NUMBER OF
EXPERTS IN THE FIELD, ONE IN
PARTICULAR WHO WAS ON YOUR SIDE
OF THIS ARGUMENT, ARGUING THAT
MYRIAD SHOULD NOT BE ABLE TO
PATENT THE GENE, AND ONE OF THEH
PART OF THE ARGUMENT
MR. DICKINSON IS MAKING AND I
JUST WANT TO TROD YOU WHAT THEY
SAID.
THEY SAID MYRIAD STILL HAS THE
PROPRIETARY DATABASE, WHICH
MEANS EVEN IF SOMEBODY ELSE--
SOME OTHER COMPANY INVENT A
COMPETING TEST, THEY'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO ESSENTIALLY DEAL WITH
MYRIAD'S MONOPOLY ON INFORMATION
TO INTERPRET WHAT THOSE TESTS
MEAN.
>> WELL, WE AGREE THAT IS A
PROBLEM.
AND THE PAT ENTS ON THE GENES
ALLOWED MYRIAD TO DEVELOP THAT
PROPRIETARY DATABASE, AND THAT'S
WHY IT'S SO IMPORTANT THAT THE
COURT'S RULING TODAY INVALIDATE
THESE KINDS OF PATENTS ON HUMAN
GENES SO WE DON'T HAVE THE
SITUATION IN THE FUTURE WITH
OTHER GENES WHERE ONE COMPANY IS
ABLE TO AMASS THAT KIND OF
INFORMATION.
BUT I THINK WHAT WE'LL SEE GOING
FORWARD IS THAT BECAUSE THERE
WILL BE COMPETITION, BECAUSE
OTHER LABORATORIES WILL BE
OFFERING THIS TESTING, THAT KIND
OF INFORMATION WILL BE MUCH MORE
FREELY SHARED, AND MYRIAD'S HOLD
ON THAT INFORMATION WON'T BE
ABLE TO LAST THE WAY THAT
THEY'VE TRIED TO DO SO BY USING
THE PAT ENTS TO HAVE THE
MONOPOLY ON THE TESTING ITSELF.
>> WELL, THAT ACTUALLY BRINGS UP
ANOTHER POINT, AND PERHAPS
ANOTHER CONCERN.
THE SOCIETAL BARGAIN THAT'S
BASED ON THE PATENT SYSTEM, IS
IF YOU DISCLOSE YOUR INVENTION
COMPLETE WE WILL GIVE YOU THE
PROPRIETARY RIGHT FOR A PERIOD
OF TIME.
WHAT HAPPENS IF YOU DON'T HAVE
THE PROPRIETARY RIGHTS IS IT
DRIVES IT UNDERGROUND.
IT CAUSES RESEARCHERS TO KEEP IT
SECRET, NOT TO DO SO MUCH
COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH.
THAT COULD BE A DOWNSIDE WE
HAVEN'T SEEN YET.
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO COME
BACK TO THE ESSENCE HERE, SANDRA
PARK, AND THAT IS WHAT DOES THIS
MEAN FOR WOMEN WHO MAY HAVE
THE-- ONE OF THE BRCA GENES FOR
EITHER BREAST OR OVARIAN CANCER,
AND WHAT ARE THEIR PROSPECTS FOR
GETTING THE KIND OF HELP THEY
NEED, THE KIND OF TREATMENT THAT
THEY NEED?
WHAT DOES THIS DECISION MEAN
WITH REGARD TO THEM?
>> WELL, THEY WILL HAVE BETTER
ACCESS TO GENETIC TESTING OF
THESE GENES.
AND IN FACT IT WILL MAY BE THAT
COMPANIES WILL BE OFFERING THE
TESTING NOT ONLY OF THE BRCA
GENES BUT THE MANY OTHER GENES
RELATED TO BREAST AND OVARIAN
CANCER.
AND THAT'S REALLY IMPORTANT.
WHEN A PATIENT GETS A GENETIC
TEST, SHE DOESN'T NECESSARILY
CARE ONLY ABOUT WHETHER SHE HAS
A MUTATION OR THE BRCA1 OR 2
GENE.
SHE WANTSHE WANTS TO UNDERSTANDR
COMPREHENSIVE GENETIC RISK FOR
THESE DISEASES, SO LABORATORIES
WILL BE ABLE TO OFFER THAT TEST
CHICAGO UP TO NOW THEY HAVE NOT
DONE BECAUSE OF THE MYRIAD PAT
ENTS.
THERE WILL ALSO BE MORE SECOND
OPINION TESTING, AND THAT HAS
BEEN AN IMPORTANT ISSUE FOR MANY
PATIENTS.
AND WE ALSO THINK COST WILL BE
DRIVEN DOWN BECAUSE OF
MARKETPLACE PRESSURES.
>> Woodruff: VERY QUICKLY,
TODD DICKINSON, HOW DO YOU SEE
THE EFFECT ON THOSE WOMEN WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT?
>> I THINK MANY OF THOSE EFFECTS
MIGHT, INDEED, OCCUR BUT THAT'S
NOT REALLY A FUNCTION OF THE
PATENT SYSTEM.
THE BASIC QUESTION IS NOT
WHETHER MYRIAD DESERVED THE
PATENT OR NOT.
THE QUESTION IS WHETHER IT WAS
PATENT ELIGIBLE.
I THINK MANY PEOPLE WOULD
BELIEVE THIS IS A VERY DESERVING
EXPAWZ MYRIAD IS PROVIDING A
VERY VALUABLE SERVICE AND AS WE
MOVE FORWARD FROM HERE OTHERS
WILL BE ABLE TO TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF THAT.
>> Woodruff: WE ARE GOING TO
LEAVE IT THERE.
TODD DICKINSON, AND SANDRA PARK.
THANK YOU.
>> Brown: NOW, A TWO-PART LOOK
AT ISSUES AFFECTING GAYS AND
LESBIANS, AHEAD OF MUCH-
ANTICIPATED SUPREME COURT
DECISIONS COMING SOON ON MAJOR
CASES INVOLVING SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE.
RAY SUAREZ BEGINS OUR COVERAGE.
>> Suarez: A NEW SURVEY PROVIDES
ONE OF THE LARGEST AND MOST
COMPLEX PORTRAITS OF WHAT LIFE
IS LIKE TODAY FOR GAY, LESBIAN,
BISEXUAL AND TRANSGENDER
AMERICANS.
THE SWEEPING SURVEY CONDUCTED BY
THE PEW RESEARCH CENTER-SPANNED
TOPICS INCLUDING POLITICAL
VIEWS, SOCIAL STIGMAS AND THE
DIFFICULTIES OF COMING OUT.
IT FINDS GROWING ACCEPTANCE IN
THE U.S. OF THE L.G.B.T.
COMMUNITY: 92% OF THOSE SURVEYED
SAID THEY AGREED WITH THAT.
YET 53% SAY THERE IS STILL
DISCRIMINATION.
THE SURVEY WAS DONE JUST WEEKS
BEFORE THE SUPREME COURT
DECISION AND WAS RELEASED DURING
PRIDE MONTH.
TODAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA SPOKE AT
THE WHITE HOUSE FOR AN L.G.B.T.
PRIDE MONTH CELEBRATION.
>> FROM MINNESOTA TO MARYLAND,
FROM THE UNITED STATES SENATE TO
THE N.B.A., IT'S CLEAR WE'RE
REACHING A TURNING POINT.
( APPLAUSE )
WE HAVE-- WE'VE BECOME NOT JUST
MORE ACCEPTING.
WE'VE BECOME MORE LOVING AS A
COUNTRY AND AS A POSSIBLE.
HEART AND MIEBDZ CHANGE WITH
TIME.
LAWS DO, TOO.
CHANGE LIKE THAT ISN'T SOMETHING
THAT STARTS HERE IN WASHINGTON,
BUT IT'S SOMETHING THAT HAS THE
POWER THAT WASHINGTON HAS A
GREAT DEAL OF DIFFICULTY
RESISTING OVER TIME.
>> Suarez: FOR MORE WE TURN TO
PAUL TAYLOR, EXECUTIVE VICE
PRESIDENT OF THE PEW RESEARCH
CENTER AND CO-AUTHOR OF THE
L.G.B.T. SURVEY.
AND GARY GATES, DISTINGUISHED
SCHOLAR AT THE WILLIAMS CENTER
AT U.C.L.A. AND CO-AUTHOR OF
"THE GAY AND LESBIAN ATLAS."
PAUL TAYLOR, THIS IS A SURVEY
INVOLVING A COMMUNITY THAT'S
OFTEN THE OBJECT OF RESEARCH BUT
RARELY THE SUBJECT OF RESEARCH.
DID THE L.G.B.T. AMERICANS THAT
YOU SPOKE TO AGREE WITH WHAT WE
JUST HEARD THE PRESIDENT SAYING
ABOUT CHANGE BEING UNDER WAY?
>> YES.
WE HAD-- AS YOU SAID, 93% SAYING
SOCIETY IS MORE ACCEPTING NOW
THAN IT WAS 10 YEARS AGO.
AND THEN WE SAID ABOUT WHAT 10
YEARS FROM NOW, AND ANOTHER 92%,
93% SAID IT WILL BE MORE
ACCEPTING.
WE TAKE A LOT OF SURVEYS.
WE RARELY SEE NUMBERS IN THE
90s.
YOU ASK PEOPLE, "DOES YOUR
MOTHER LOVE YOU IS THERE?
MAYBE YOU'LL GET IN THE 90s.
THIS IS A NEAR UNIVERSALLY HELD
BELIEF.
IT'S AN UNDERSTANDING THAT THERE
HAS BEEN AN EXTRAORDINARY AMOUNT
OF CHANGE IN SOCIETAL ATTITUDES.
SO THAT IS THE GOOD NEWS STORY.
I SAID EAR TODAY, THE
L.G.B.T. POPULATION IS LIVING IN
THE BEST OF TIMES BUT THEY ARE
NOT EASY TIMES, AND THERE IS
ANOTHER SIDE TO THE STORY, AND
WE ASKED A LOT OF QUESTIONS
ABOUT THE EXPERIENCES THEY HAVE
HAD, THE PERCEPTIONS OF
DISCRIMINATION AND STIGMA, AND
THEY'RE PRETTY POWERFUL.
AND YOU HAD A COUPLE OF EXAMPLES
OF THAT.
ONE OF THE ONES THAT STRUCK ME
IS EVEN IN THESE MORE ACCEPTING
TIMES, IN OUR SURVEY POPULATION,
WE TALKED ABOUT 1200 PEOPLE IN
THIS COMMUNITY, ONLY SLIGHTLY
OVER HALF SAID THEY HAD TOLD
THEIR MOTHER OF THEIR SEXUAL
ORIENTATION, AND ONLY ABOUT 4 IN
10 SAID THEY HAD TOLD THEIR
FARTHER.
SO THAT IS AN ILLUSTRATION OF A
COMMUNITY, THEY'RE NOT YET ABLE
OR WILLING OR FEEL COMFORTABLE
SHARING THAT WITH THE PEOPLE
THEY'RE CLOSEST TO.
>> Suarez: THAT IDEA THAT
THINGS ARE BETTER BUT... COMES
THROUGH IN DATA POINT AFTER DATA
POINT.
YOU ASK IF PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
SUBJECT TO SLURS OR JOKES.
SAY.
LE MAJORITY SAID YES, AT SOME
TIME THEY HAD BEEN SUBJECT TO
SLURS OR JOKES.
AND THEN YOU ASKED HAS ANY OF
THIS HAPPENED IN THE PAST YEAR.
AND IT WAS ABOUT ONE OUT OF SIX
OF L.G.B.T. PEOPLE.
HAVE THEY BEEN THREATENED OR
PHYSICALLY ATTACKED?
A MUCH SMALLER NUMBER.
SO THAT THE KIND OF RESENTMENTS
THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT IN
SOCIETY RARELY TAKE A PHYSICAL
FORGE BUT EVEN AMONG THAT
NUMBER, 26% AT THIS TIME IN
THEIRS LIVES.
ONLY 4% IN THE LAST YEAR OR SO.
GARY GATES, WHAT DOES THAT TELL
YOU ABOUT THE STATE OF L.G.B.T.
AMERICA?
>> WELL, I THINK, AS PAUL SAID,
I THINK IT SAYS THAT L.G.B.T.
AMERICANS ARE VERY CLEAR THAT
THIKS HAVE GOTTEN MUCH BETTER.
BUT THEY'RE NOT THERE YET.
I THINK MANY OF THEM, AS PAUL
MENTIONED, HAVEN'T COME OUT TO
THEIR PARENTS.
STILL MANY EXPERIENCE A VARIETY
OF DISCRIMINATION, A VARIETY OF
TYPES OF DISCRIMINATION,
INCLUDING IN THEIR CHURCHES, IN
THEIR FAMILIES, WITH THEIR
FRIENDS.
AND I THINK THAT'S THE LIFE--
ONE OF THE HUGE CONTRIBUTIONS OF
THIS SURVEY IS FOCUSING ON THAT
KIND OF DAY-TO-DAY EXISTENCE OF
L.G.B.T. AMERICANS IN THIS TIME
OF RAPID CHANGE.
>> Suarez: GARY, ONE FINDING
THAT I FOUND VERY INTERESTING
WAS THE SELF-REPORTING AMONG
THIS POPULATION THAT THEY WERE
MUCH MORE SYMPATHETIC TO OTHER
PEOPLE IN SOCIETY WHO THEY
THOUGHT ALSO FACED VARIOUS KINDS
OF DISCRIMINATION.
>> RIGHT.
>> Suarez: DOES THAT EXPLAIN
WHY GAY AMERICANS ARE SO
PROMINENT AS ACTIVISTS IN OTHER
PEOPLE'S FIGHTS?
>> WELL, I THINK SO.
I MEAN, I THINK-- THERE'S NO
QUESTION THAT THE EXPERIENCE OF
BEING STIGMATIZED ALLOWS PEOPLE
TO UNDERSTAND WHAT THAT'S LIKE,
AND THEN TO EMPATHIZE OR RELATE
TO OTHER PEOPLE WHO HAVE
EXPERIENCED STIGMA.
AND I THINK THAT IS ONE OF THE
REASONS YOU SEE SO MANY L.G.B.T.
PEOPLE INVOLVED IN A VARIETY OF
ACTIVIST CAUSES THAT ARE NOT
NECESSARILY L.G.B.T. SPECIFIC.
>> Suarez: PAUL TAYLOR OF
COURSE YOU COULDN'T HAVE DONE
THIS SURWAY VEY WITHOUT ASKING
ABOUT MARRIAGE AND AN
INTERESTING PIECE OF DATA
EMERGED THERE.
NEAR UNIVERSAL SUPPORT OF
LEGALIZATION OF MARRIAGE FOR GAY
PEOPLE, 93%.
YET, 4 OUT OF 10 SAY THE
MARRIAGE DEBATE HAS DRAWN TOO
MUCH ATTENTION FROM OTHER ISSUES
THAT GAY PEOPLE FACE.
LIKE WHAT?
>> LIKE EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS.
LIKE AID, HIV PROGRAMS.
LIKE ADOPTION RIGHTS.
THIS IS A COMMUNITY THAT HAS
LOTS OF ISSUES FOR POLITICAL
CONSTITUTIONAL LEGAL REASONS, WE
ALL UNDERSTAND THAT THE SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE ISSUE HAS COME-- BECOME
FRONT AND CENTER.
AND LITERALLY AND FIGURATIVELY
IT HAS BECOME THE SYMBOLIC
ISSUE.
AND IT OBVIOUSLY HAS VERY REAL
IMPORTANCE AS WELL.
A MAJORITY SAY YES-- 60% SAY
IT'S A GOOD THING THAT IT IS THE
CENTERPIECE ISSUE, EVEN AT THE
EXPENSE OF THE OTHER ISSUES WE
CARE ABOUT, BUT A SIGNIFICANT
MINORITY SAYS, WAIT A MINUTE,
THERE ARE A LOT OF OTHER THINGS
ON THE TABLE.
>> Suarez: SO, GARY, WHEN GAY
PEOPLE TALK ABOUT THEIR LIVES
AND THINK ABOUT THEIR LIVES,
EVEN THOUGH THEY SEE MARRIAGE AS
SORT OF DROWNING OUT THE OTHER
ISSUES, IS IT A GATEWAY ISSUE
THAT ONCE YOU CARLE THIS
THRESHOLD, SOME OF THOSE OTHER
THINGS BECOME EASIER.
>> WELL, I THINK IN FACT MANY
L.G.B.T. PEOPLE BELIEVE THAT'S
THE CASE.
BUT AS PAUL POINTED OUT, I THINK
THERE IS A BIT OF A CHALLENGE
HERE FROM A SIZE SIZABLE GROUP
OF L.G.B.T. PEOPLE WHO REALLY
SEE, FOR INSTANCE, WORKPLACE
DISCRIMINATION AS SOMETHING THEY
EXPERIENCE AT RELATIVELY HIGH
LEVELS, AND THAT THEY BELIEVE
THAT THERE SHOULD BE LAWS THAT
PROTECT THEM FROM THAT KIND OF
DISCRIMINATION.
AND, YOU KNOW, I THINK THESE
DATA CHALLENGE TO US THINK
THROUGH ALL OF THOSE ISSUES.
>> Suarez: LEANING FORWARD,
DID YOU ASK PEOPLE-- I GUESS YOU
ASKED PEOPLE, ALSO, TO
SELF-REPORT ABOUT QUESTIONS YOU
DIDN'T ASK AND GOT, IN YOUR OWN
WORDS, SOME VERY TOUCHING
RESPONSES.
>> WE CONDUCTED THIS SURVEY
ONLINE, WHICH WE THINK WAS
METHODOLOGICALLY WISE BECAUSE
IT'S A MORE ANONYMOUS WAY OF
DOING SURVEYS, AND PART ISSUE
HERE IS ARE YOU WILLING TO COME
OUT IN-- TO A SURVEY TAKER?
AND THAT ALSO GAVE US THE
ABILITY TO PUT LITTLE BOXES, AS
PEOPLE WERE FILLING OUT THEIR
FORMS ON THEIR COMPUTER, AND WE
ASKED THEM FOR THEIR COMMENT.
>> Suarez: ANY ONE JUMP OUT AT
YOU?
>> NO, BUT 1,000 JUMPED OUT AT
ME.
I USED TO BE A NEWSPAPER
REPORTER AND I KIND OF KNOW A
GOOD QUOTE.
THERE ARE 1,000 GOOD QUOTES.
THESE SISTERS RIVETTING BECAUSE
THE LIFE THESE FOLKS HAVE LED AT
ALL AGES ARE FASCINATING, AND
THE LIVES OF THE MIDDLE AGED AND
OLDER SURVEY RESPONDENTS WHO
SORT OF SAY WITH REGRET, "I WISH
I HAD COME OUT EARLIER."
WE TRACK IN ALL OF THEIR LIVES
WHEN THEY CAME OUT AND HOW IT
WAS, SOME GOOD, SOMEBAD,  ALL
FASCINATING.
>> Suarez: PAUL TAYLOR, GARY
GATES, GENTLEMEN THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Woodruff: ONE OF THE HIGHLY
ANTICIPATED GAY MARRIAGE CASES
IS THE FOCUS OF OUR NEXT STORY.
THE SUPREME COURT IS DECIDING
WHETHER CALIFORNIA'S 2008 BALLOT
MEASURE BANNING SAME-SEX COUPLES
FROM WEDDING IS CONSTITUTIONAL.
"NHOUR" CORRESPONDENT SPENCER
MICHELS PREVIEWS THE PROPOSITION
8 CASE, AND HOW THE GOLDEN STATE
IS PREPARING FOR THE RULING.
>> I, STATE YOUR NAME, DO
SOLEMNLY SWEAR...
>> Reporter: VOLUNTEER CITY
EMPLOYEES IN SAN FRANCISCO GOT
TRAINED THIS WEEK ON HOW TO
ISSUE MARRIAGE LICENSES AND
PERFORM CEREMONIES.
THE CITY IS PREPARING FOR A
POSSIBLE RUSH OF SAME SEX
MARRIAGES IF THE SUPREME COURT
ALLOWS THEM TO START UP AGAIN IN
CALIFORNIA.
>> WE WANT TO BE READY
IMMEDIATELY SO PEOPLE CAN
CELEBRATE AND GET MARRIED AS
SOON AS POSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: THERE MUST BE SOME
PEOPLE IN SAN FRANCISCO WHO
DON'T THINK THIS IS A GREAT
IDEA.
>> YOU KNOW, WE'RE NOT HEARING
FROM THEM.
>> Reporter: THAT TRAINING
SESSION TOOK PLACE IN SAN
FRANCISCO'S CITY HALL, WHERE
THIS WHOLE CONTROVERSY CAME TO
THE FORE ALMOST A DECADE AGO.
THAT WAS WHEN THEN-MAYOR GAVIN
NEWSOM DECREED THAT SAN
FRANCISCO WOULD BEGIN PERFORMING
SAME SEX MARRIAGES, DESPITE A
STATE BAN ON THE PRACTICE.
4,000 COUPLES GOT LICENSES AND
GOT MARRIED TO THE DISMAY OF
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS LIKE THE
CAMPAIGN FOR CHILDREN AND
FAMILIES.
>> STATE LAW IS VERY CLEAR.
MARRIAGE IS ONLY FOR A MAN AND A
WOMAN.
THE MAYOR OF SAN FRANCISCO IS
VIOLATING STATE LAW.
>> Reporter: WITHIN A MONTH, THE
WEDDINGS AND BOTH SIDES OF THE
DEBATE TOOK TO THE STREETS FOR A
LONG FIGHT.
EVENTUALLY, THE STATE SUPREME
COURT DECIDED SUCH WEDDINGS WERE
LEGAL, AND ANOTHER 18,000
COUPLES WERE WED, UNTIL
PROPOSITION 8, PASSED BY THE
VOTERS IN 2008, BANNED SAME SEX
MARRIAGE.
PROP 8 WAS RULED
UNCONSTITUTIONAL BY A FEDERAL
JUDGE WHO ASSERTED IT WAS
DISCRIMINATORY, BUT THE SUPREME
COURT NOW MUST RULE ON THAT
ISSUE.
AND INTERESTED PARTIES
THROUGHOUT CALIFORNIA ARE
WAITING WITH BATED BREATH.
>> WE CERTAINLY HOPE THAT THE
COURT WILL UPHOLD THE RIGHT OF
VOTERS OF CALIFORNIA TO DEFINE
WHAT MARRIAGE IS.
>> Reporter: WILLIAM MAY IS
PRESIDENT OF CATHOLICS FOR THE
COMMON GOOD AND WAS ACTIVELY
INVOLVED IN THE CAMPAIGN TO PASS
PROP 8.
>> MARRIAGE BETWEEN A MAN AND A
WOMEN FORMS THE ONLY CIVIL
INSTITUTION THAT IS GEARED
TOWARDS UNITING KIDS WITH THEIR
MOMS AND DADS.
TODAY WE HAVE TOO HIGH INCIDENTS
OF SINGLE PARENTING, WHICH IS
THE ROOT CAUSE OF POVERTY.
>> Reporter: BUT FORMER SAN
FRANCISCO MAYOR GAVIN NEWSOM,
NOW THE STATE'S LIEUTENANT
GOVERNOR, DOESN'T SEE IT THAT
WAY AT ALL.
HE'S STILL INTENSELY INTERESTED
IN PURSUING THE REVOLUTION HE
HELPED TO START.
>> I DIDN'T KNOW WHAT WE WERE
ENTERING INTO.
I FELT LIKE WE NEEDED TO DO
SOMETHING ASSERTIVE, AND WE
STARTED WITH ONE COUPLE, PHYLLIS
LYON AND DEL MARTIN.
IT BECAME THIS REMARKABLE
EXPRESSION OF LOVE AND
REMARKABLE EXPERIENCE FOR ALL OF
US.
>> Reporter: TEN STATES AND THE
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA HAVE
APPROVED SAME SEX MARRIAGE SINCE
PROP. 8 PASSED.
AND NATIONAL PUBLICPINI OON
POLLS HAVE INDICATED A SHIFT
TOWARDS MORE ACCEPTANCE OF THOSE
MARRIAGES.
NOW, THE HIGH COURT IS DELVING
INTO THE COMPLEX CASE AND THAT
MAY REQUIRE A COMPLEX DECISION.
VIC AMAR TEACHES CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA AT DAVIS.
>> CONCEIVABLY THE COURT COULD
RULE LARGE IN FAVOR OF THE
PLAINTIFFS, PROCLAIM A NATIONAL
RIGHT UNDER THE 14TH AMENDMENT
BUT THAT WOULD MEAN INVALIDATING
LAWS OF ABOUT 38 STATES, AND SO
THAT'S A DIFFICULT THING FOR A
COURT OF UNELECTED JUSTICES TO
DO.
ON THE OTHER HAND, THE COURT
COULD REJECT THE CHALLENGE TO
PROP. 8 AND SAY THE FEDERAL
CONSTITUTION DOES NOT HAVE
ANYTHING TO SAY ABOUT SAME SEX
MARRIAGE, AND SAME SEX MARRIAGE
IS A MATTER FOR EACH STATE TO
DECIDE ON ITS OWN.
>> Reporter: THE COURT COULD
ALSO RULE THAT SINCE THE STATE
REFUSED TO DEFEND PROP. 8,  THE
MEASURES SPONSORS DON'T HAVE
STANDING TO DEFEND IT.
THE COURT COULD APPROVE SAME SEX
MARRIAGES FOR CALIFORNIA, BUT
NOT FOR ALL STATES.
BUT SHOULD THE COURT FAIL TO
APPROVE AT LEAST SOME SAME SEX
MARRIAGES, NEWSOM ANTICIPATES
MORE ACTIVISM.
>> GOD FORBID THEY DO THE WRONG
THING, AND THEY JUST REJECT.
I TELL YOU WHAT A BACKLASH.
YOU JUST WAIT IF THEY GO SOUTH.
IN MANY WAYS IT WILL JUST UNITE
PEOPLE THAT MAY BE QUIETLY
SUPPORTIVE ON THE SIDELINE, THAT
I THINK WILL SAY, "ALL RIGHT,
WAIT A SECOND.
THIS IS A CIVIL RIGHTS
STRUGGLE."
>> Reporter: THE COURT BATTLE
ITSELF HAS RE-ACTIVATED MANY IN
THE GAY AND LESBIAN COMMUNITY.
IN SAN FRANCISCO, THOUSANDS OF
DEMONSTRATORS RALLIED THE DAY
THE COURT HEARD THE CASE.
AMONG THEM WAS ANDRE SANCHEZ, A
30-YEAR-OLD ONE-TIME GAY
ACTIVIST, AND THE PARTNER OF 31-
YEAR-OLD WES McGAUGHEY.
TOGETHER FOR ALMOST SEVEN YEARS,
THEY FIGURE IT'S TIME TO GET
MARRIED.
THEIR BITTERNESS TOWARD PROP 8
CONVINCED THEM TO PULL BACK FROM
POLITICS.
BUT WITH THE CASE PENDING, THEY
ARE WATCHING WITH PERSONAL
INTEREST.
THEY INTEND TO HAVE A COMMITMENT
CEREMONY, REGARDLESS OF THE
JUSTICES' DECISION. IF WE'RE JUG
THE GUN.
WE WILL DO IT WITH OR WITHOUT
THEM.
WOUWELD LIKE TO DO IT WITH THEM
BECAUSE WE WOULD LIKE THE SAME
RIGHTS AS ANYBODY ELSE.
>> I WOULD LIKE TO BE EQUAL TO
MY PARENTS.
I WOULD LIKE WES TO BE EQUAL TO
HIS PARENTS, AND ITS JUST
SOMETHING THAT WE HAVE TO FIGHT
FOR CONSTANTLY.
>> Reporter: SANCHEZ, A LATINO
CATHOLIC, SAYS HIS FAMILY'S
ATTITUDES TOWARD  GAY MARRIAGE
HAVE MIRRORED THE NATIONAL
TREND.
>> MY PARENTS GREW UP VERY
CATHOLIC, SO I HAD A REALLY
TOUGH TIME COMING OUT AS A YOUNG
MAN.
OVER SIX AND A HALF YEARS THIS
EVOLUTION WITH MY MOM HAS BEEN
INCREDIBLE, SHE WENT FROM
SOMEONE I WOULD TAGLINE A BIGOT,
SHE HATED THE THOUGHT OF ME AND
WES TOGETHER AND AS SHE GOT TO
KNOW WES.
SHE REALLY ACCEPTED HIM, SO IT'S
COMPLETELY CHANGED HER VIEWS,
HER VOTING VIEWS, YOU KNOW, IT'S
JUST AMAZING.
>> Reporter: FOR LAY CATHOLIC
LEADER WILLIAM MAY THE BATTLE
AGAINST SAME SEX MARRIAGES WILL
CONTINUE, IF THE SUPREME COURT
ALLOWS THEM TO GO FORWARD.
>> WE JUST HAVE TO KEEP
FIGHTING, AND ITS REALLY A
MATTER OF SOCIAL JUSTICE.
>> Reporter: THE COURT IS
EXPECTED TO RELEASE ITS DECISION
BEFORE THE END OF THE MONTH.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE THIS MONTH,
WE'LL HAVE LIVE COVERAGE OF THE
SUPREME COURT'S END-OF-TERM
DECISIONS.
ON DAYS JUSTICES ISSUE OPINIONS,
WE'LL CARRY SCOTUSBLOG'S
REPORTING FROM INSIDE THE
COURTROOM ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT, THE
RETURN OF A POPULAR MYSTERY
SERIES.
WHEN LAST SEEN, EZEZIEL "EASY"
RAWLINS WAS DRIVING OVER A
CLIFF, APPARENTLY TO HIS DEATH.
RAWLINS IS THE FICTIONAL PRIVATE
EYE WHO IN THE COURSE OF A DOZEN
BOOKS HAS BECOME ONE OF THE
BEST-KNOWN, LONGEST-RUNNING
CHARACTERS IN AMERICAN
LITERATURE.
HIS LATEST ADVENTURE IS TOLD IN
THE NEW NOVEL, "LITTLE GREEN".
AUTHOR WALTER MOSLEY HAS WRITTEN
MORE THAN 40 BOOKS IN MANY
GENRES ANDECE RIVED NUMEROUS
HONORS.
HE JOINED US HERE EARLIER THIS
WEEK.
WELCOME.
>> IT'S GOOD TO BE HERE.
>> Brown: THE RETURN OF A DEAD
MAN PUP SEEM TO KILL OFF YOUR
FAMOUS HERO AND THEN BROUGHT HIM
BACK TO LIFE.
>> IT WAS FIRST PERSON
NARRATIVE.
HE WASN'T DEAD.
HE WENT OFF THE CLIFF AND
EVERYTHING WENT BLACK.
I DIDN'T SAY, "I DIVIDE."
I JUST SAID HE WENT OFF THE
CLIFF.
I STOPPED WRITING THE BOOKS
BECAUSE I FELT I WAS GETTING
STEAL WRITING THE CHARACTER AND
I WANTED TO STOP, AND FOUR, FIVE
YEARS WENT BY AND I SAID COULD
GO BACK TO THAT.TEND TO END THE
SERIES, BUT HERE WE ARE.
>> Brown: I SEE COMPARISONSES
TO ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE KILLS OFF
SHERLOCK HOLMES AND BRINGS HIM
BACK AGAIN.
IT'S HARD TO KILL OFF A
CHARACTER LIKE THIS.
>> IT IS DIFFICULT.
I'M NOT-- I KNOW HE CAME BACK
AND WROTE IT AGAIN.
I DON'T KNOW IF IT WAS BECAUSE
HE DIDN'T HAVE MONEY OR THE
PEOPLE WERE JUST BOTHERING HIM
TOO MUCH.
Y REALLY WANT TO WRITE ABOUT
"EASY" SO.
>> Brown: FOR THOSE WHO DON'T
KNOW THE "EASY RAWLINS" BOOKS,
THEY'RE SET IN A VERY PARTICULAR
PLACE-- LOS ANGELES-- AND
PARTICULARLY IN THE WATTS AREA,
IN A TIME, POST-WORLD WAR II TO
THE 40s AND THIS ONE UP TO THE
60s.
IS ALL OF THAT BY ACCIDENT OR
DID YOU JUST FIND A CHARACTER
AND YOU WANTED TO STICK WITH HIM
OR DID YOU WANT TO EXPLORE A
TIME AND & PLACE?
>> THERE WERE A COUPLE OF
THINGS.
DEFINITELY, THAT'S WHERE I'M
FROM.
I'M BORN IN '52 IN LOS ANGELES.
MY FAMILY CAME IN, IN 1945-46,
MOTHER AND FATHER FROM DIFFERENT
PLACES.
AND IN ORDER TO PUT PEOPLE
INSIDE THE CULTURE, YOU HAVE TO
BE INSIDE THE LITERATURE.
AND THE BLACK POPULATION OF LOS
ANGELES JUST-- JUST DIDN'T HAVE
THE LITERATURE, REALLY, NOT MUCH
OF ONE, ANYWAY.
SO I DECIDED I'D WRITE THESE
BOOKS SO I COULD WRITE ABOUT LOS
ANGELES, I COULD WRITE ABOUT
POSTWAR LOS ANGELES.
>> Brown: YOU HAD THAT IN
MIND, THERE WAS A VACUUM OF
PARTICULARLY BLACK LITERATURE.
>> YES.
>> Brown: ONE OF THE RUNNING
JOKES IN THE BOOK-- ALTHOUGH
IT'S A SERIOUS LINE-- IS OFTEN
WHEN SOMEBODY MEETS EASY RAWLINS
FOR THE FIRST TIME AND THEY FIND
OUT WHAT HE DOES AND THEY SAY,
"I NEVER MET A BLACK PRIVED EYE
BEFORE."
AND HE SAYS, IT'S A RARE BREED.
>> HE'S A NEW CHARACTER FOR THIS
WORLD, AND-- AND HE'S SOMEBODY
WHO GOES INTO PLACES WHERE OTHER
PEOPLE CAN'T GO, BEING A BLACK
MAN BECAUSE NOBODY THINKS
THERE'S A BLACK DETECTIVE.
HE SAYS THEY DON'T SEE ME
COMING.
THEY DON'T KNOW WHEN I'M THERE.
AND THEY DON'T KNOW I'VE LEFT.
THAT'S THE WAY HIS LIFE IS.
AND IT MAKES HIM AN
ALMOST-PERFECT DETECTIVE.
>> Brown: AND THAT ALLOWS YOU
TO LOOK AT VARIOUS STRAINS OF
AMERICAN CULTURE, RIGHT?
IN THIS CASE, THE 60s,
POST-WATTS RIOTS IS THE SETTING.
>> AND THE BEGINNING OF THE
HIPPIE MOVEMENT WHICH IS A WHOLE
OTHER SURPRISING EVENT IN
CALIFORNIA AT THIS TIME.
YOU KNOW, IF YOU'RE IN
CALIFORNIA IN 1964, IT'S ONE LOS
ANGELES, AND IF YOU'RE THERE IN
1968, THERE ARE ALL THESE
HIPPIES EVERYWHERE.
WHERE DID THEY COME FROM FR?
HOW DID THEY HAVE TIME TO GROW
THAT HAIR.
IT'S PRETTY AMAZING.
I'M REALLY ENJOYING IT BECAUSE--
YOU KNOW, SO MANY STORIES HAVE
BEEN TOLD ABOUT L.A., BUT THESE
STORIES ALMOST EVERYONE IS A NEW
STORY BECAUSE OF THE POINT OF
VIEW, NOT BECAUSE IT'S A-- SOME
SECRET THAT'S BEING HELD.
>> Brown: BECAUSE OF THE NEW
TIME AS WELL.
>> AND EVERYBODY'S LIKE, YOU
KNOW, EXPERIENCING A DIFFERENT
KIND OF WORLD.
AND IT'S CHANGING SO QUICKLY.
>> Brown: AS I SAID, YOU WRITE
IN MANY STYLES AND GENRES AND
THE "EASY" RAWLINS BOOKS ARE
OFTEN-- THEY'RE USUALLY
DESCRIBED AS CRIME FICTION,
MYSTERIES.
DO YOU THINK OF THEM THAT WAY.
OR DO YO YOU EVEN THINK ABOUT
DIFFERENT GENRES WHEN YOU'RE
WORK JIEG THINK ABOUT GENRE
SOMEWHAT.
ONCE I'M?
THE GENRE, I LIKE TO BE TRUE TO
IT.
I I DON'T WANT TO BE ONE OF THE
WRITERS WHO SAYS, I'M NOT REALLY
A MYSTERY WRITER."
WHEN I WRITE A MYSTERY, IT'S A
MYSTERY.
WHEN I WRITE A LITERARY NOVEL--
>> Brown: WHAT IS BEING TRUE
TO A MYSTERY.
>> THERE'S A CRIME THAT'S BEEN
COMMITTED THAT EXISTS ON A LEGAL
LEVEL OA SOCIAL LEVEL, AND ON A
MORAL LEVEL DISPP IF YOU'RE
REALLY, REALLY GOOD AT IT ON A
PHILOSOPHICAL LEVEL.
AND THERE HAS TO BE AN ANSWER,
NOT NECESSARILY A SOLUTION, BUT
AN ANSWER TO THAT CRIME.
WHO DID IT?
WHY DID THEY DO IT?
SHOULD YOU TURN THEM IN?
A WHOLE SERIES OF QUESTIONS, AND
THAT'S WHAT MYSTERIES DO.
>> Brown: BUT IF YOU'RE REALLY
GOOD AT IT, YOU'RE SAYING A
LEVEL THAT'S BEYOND WHO THE DUN
IT.
>> IF YOU'RE REALLY GOOD AT IT,
IT MAKES YOU THINK ABOUT THE
NATURE OF THE SOCIETY.
I THINK AT THE END OF THIS BOOK,
EASY HAS TO MAKE RAY FEW
CHOICES.
AND I HOPEFULLY-- HOPEFULLY IT
WILL MAKE YOU THINK ABOUT THE
CHINESES HE HAS TO MAKE AND WHY.
AND IT GOES A LITTLE BEYOND THE
MYSTERY BUT STAYS RIGHT INSIDE
THE CRIME.
>> Brown: AND PRESUMABLY, A
GOOD MYSTERY HAS TO BE A GOOD--
I MEAN, QUALITIES OF A NOVEL ARE
THE QUALITIES OF A NOVEL.
>> GOOD WRITING IS GOOD WRITING
AND BAD WRITING IT BAD WRITING.
PEOPLE SAY-- YOU'LL SAY, THIS
GENRE IS BETTER WRITING THAN
THIS WRITING.
HOW CAN THAT BE?
THEY'RE BOTH IN ENGLISH.
HOW CAN ONE BE BETTER THAN THE
OTHER?
A LOT OF PEOPLE DO THINK LIKE
THAT.
MY GENRE, WHEN I'M WRITING CRIME
FICTION IS ONE THING.
BUT LIKE SCIENCE FICTION, PEOPLE
COMPLETELY ESHOE.
ROMANCE, THAT'S TERRIBLE
WRITING.
BUT IT'S NOT NECESSARILY.
IF YOU'RE A GOOD WRITER, YOU
WRITE A GOOD BOOK.
>> Brown: I HAVE TALKED WITH
BIOGRAPHERS WHO STAY WITH ONE
SUBJECT FOR DECADES.
YOU HAVE DONE THAT AS WELL.
IS IT STILL FULFILLING?
IS IT STILL FUN.
IT'S AN INTERESTING THING, THE
TOPIC THEY STAY WITH THE MOST IS
BLACK MALE HEROES.
>> Brown: IN ALL THESE
DIFFERENT GENRES.
>> BECAUSE I'M ONE OF THE FEW
PEOPLE REALLY EVER IN THE
HISTORY OF LITERATURE IN THE
WEST WHO WRITES ABOUT BLACK MALE
HEROS.
THERE ARE A LOT OF PROTAGONISTS
BUT I'M TALKING ABOUT HEROES.
I THINK IT'S REALLY IMPORTANT
BECAUSE EVERY CULTURE HAS THEIR
HEROES.
IT'S JUST THAT BLACK MEN, PEOPLE
ARE KIND OF AFRAID OF THEM FOR
VARIOUS REASONS, VARIOUS GUILTS,
VARIOUS ISSUES.
I LIKE TO WRITE ABOUT THEM AND I
DON'T THINK THAT'S RUNNING OUT
OF FASHION YET.
>> Brown: SO WILL THERE BE
MORE?
>> OH, YEAH, I FINISHED THE NEXT
EASY RAWLINS NOVEL.
MY EDITOR AS I WAS COMING HERE
SENT ME AN E-MAIL SAYING HE
ACCEPTED THE NEW NOVEL.
THIS ONE IS "LITTLE GREEN."
WALTER MOSLEY, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
MY CONVERSATION WITH WALTER
MOSLEY CONTINUES ONLINE WHERE WE
ASK SOME OF YOUR QUESTIONS SENT
IN AHEAD OF TIME AND YOU CAN
ALSO SEE HIM READ FROM HIS NEW
NOVEL ON OUR ART BEAT PAGE.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS ANNOUNCED
THERE IS FIRM EVIDENCE THE
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT USED CHEMICAL
WEAPONS AGAINST REBELS.
THEY SAID PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
DECIDED TO PROVIDE MILITARY
SUPPORT TO THE REBELS, BUT THEY
GAVE NO DETAILS.
AND A MAJOR WILDFIRE KEPT
GROWING IN COLORADO.
IT'S DESTROYED MORE THAN 360
HOMES AND FORCED NEARLY 40,000
PEOPLE TO EVACUATE.
>> Brown: ONLINE, A RETIRED
ECONOMICS PROFESSOR GIVES HER
ENCORE PERFORMANCE ON THE
DANCEFLOOR.
KWAME HOLMAN HAS MORE.
EVEN THOUGH COLLEGE PROFESSOR
MARY HUFF STEVENSON IS RETIRED
FROM HER CLASSROOM AT U-MASS
BOSTON, SHE WON'T STOP TEACHING.
NOW SHE LEADS CLASSES OF OLDER
ACTIVE ADULTS AS A ZUMBA
INSTRUCTOR.
READ HER STORY ON MAKING SENSE.
AND AFTER A VISIT TO OTTAWA,
POLITICAL EDITOR CHRISTINA
BELLANTONI REFLECTS ON
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN CANADIAN AND
AMERICAN POLITICS.
THAT'S ON THE HOMEPAGE
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
JEFF?
>> Brown: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS, AMONG
OTHERS.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.